.. _mesh2d:

Mesh file
=========

This is the file used to define a finite difference mesh for 2D
modelling and inversion. In the file, the x-z plane is divided into a
rectangular grid. By convention, the z-axis is positive down. The mesh
can be designed by considering it as consisting of a core portion
representing the region of interest and a padding zone which ensures
that the boundary conditions in the finite difference modelling are
handled correctly. In the core portion, the horizontal mesh is mainly
controlled by the experiment grid on which to collect the data, so the
mesh partition in this region is usually uniform given that the data are
collected at constant intervals and the cell width is an integer
fraction of the station spacing (or dipole length of the array).

An example of the file structure is as follows:

.. figure:: ../images/meshfile_format.png
   :figwidth: 75%
   :align: center
   :name: meshfile_format

#. :math:`N_x`: Number of segments used to define the horizontal partitioning

#. :math:`X_i`: Boundary of the segment in :math:`x-`\ coordinates. The first line
   has the edged of the mesh (west-most coordinate) and the next
   boundary. From there, each line is the boundary for the previous
   line.

#. :math:`NX_i`: Number of cells within the segment. The cell size is determined by
   (X:math:`_{i}` - X\ :math:`_i-1`) / NX\ :math:`_i`

#. :math:`N_z`: Number of segments used to define the vertical partitioning.

#. :math:`Z_i`: Boundary of the segment in :math:`z-`\ coordinates. These coordinates
   are in depth (z+ down). The first line has the top of the mesh
   (west-most coordinate) and the next boundary. From there, each line
   is the boundary for the previous line. NOTE: When topography is
   given, the top of the mesh (Z:math:`_0`) is set to the in the file.
   Therefore, it is encouraged to set Z\ :math:`_0 = 0` in all cases for
   user readability of the thicknesses of cells in the first segment.

#. :math:`NZ_i`: Number of cells within the segment. The cell size is determined by
   (Z:math:`_{i}` - Z\ :math:`_i-1`) / NZ\ :math:`_i`

Example of general format
-------------------------

The following is an example of a 2D mesh:

.. figure:: ../images/meshfile_format_example.png
   :figwidth: 75%
   :align: center
   :name: meshfile_format_example

In the above example, the mesh is :math:`(48 \times 27)` covering from
:math:`x = [-100,100]` and :math:`z=[0,300]` . There are 9 segments in
the file defining the horizontal partitioning which goes from
:math:`x=-300` to :math:`x=300`. The region :math:`x=[-100,100]` has
been divided into 40 equal length cells. Four padding cells of
increasing width extend the mesh out to :math:`x=[-300,300]`. In depth,
there are 14 segments over the depth range :math:`z=[0,300]`. Note that
the bottom depth is considerably larger than the depth of investigation
of the survey. This procedure is carried out automatically in
all-default mode. If default meshing is chosen, the horizontal cell size
is set to :math:`1/3` the average electrode spacing. The vertical
discretization is set to accommodate 1:2 vertical to horizontal ratio
and the padding is increased by 1.5 times. The example of the mesh is as
follows:

Notes on the 2D mesh
--------------------

Generally, at least three cells are recommended between adjacent
stations (i.e., per dipole length). In the presence of topography, one
might use a finer partitioning in sections where the topographic relief
changes rapidly. This helps to better approximate the topographic
surface using the finite difference mesh. In the presence of surface
topography, the top of the finite difference mesh corresponds to the
highest point on the surface (see also the description of ). Since the
current sources are all on the surface of the earth, the vertical mesh
has thicknesses which generally increase with depth. The cell thickness
should be small near the surface and increase slowly in the upper region
that is within the arrayâ€™s depth of investigation. Finer partitioning
can be used at a depth where there is rapid change in the conductivity
for forward modelling or where one might expect anomalous structures in
the inversion. The maximum depth for the mesh should be considerably
larger than the depth of investigation provided by the survey. The
thickness of the cells, especially near the surface, should be
determined in reference to the horizontal partitioning so that the cells
do not have an extremely large aspect ratio (width divided by
thickness). Cells with extreme aspect ratio tend to degrade the quality
of the forward solution and they can also cause undesirable abrupt
changes in the inversion results. It is good practice to keep the aspect
ratio of cells less than 5. Once the core mesh is designed, a set of
padding cells is required to extend the mesh horizontally. Three to five
cells whose width progressively increases by a factor of two to three
provide sufficient extension so that the boundary conditions are
adequately handled.

It is good practice to generate the mesh and perform a forward modelling
using a uniform conductivity model, called the half-space test. The test
for a properly designed mesh is performed by calculating the apparent
conductivities from the uniform conductivity model. The mesh is
considered adequate if the modelled responses do not deviate from the
true conductivity by more than a few percent. Otherwise, the mesh should
be modified and the test performed again. This test is valid when there
is no topography. However, a mesh designed properly for a model with
topography should pass the half-space test when the mesh is used alone
without topography.
